CHAPTER 1 — POWER-SHARING

INTRODUCTION

Belgium and Sri Lanka are two small countries — but they have taught the world a big lesson about how to live together when the people are diverse. Belgium is a multi-ethnic, multi-lingual country in the heart of Europe. Sri Lanka is a multi-ethnic island just south of India. Both began their journey as independent democracies with sharp divisions; one country built a complicated SYSTEM OF SHARING power among its communities and stayed peaceful, while the other tried to RULE BY MAJORITY ALONE — and slipped into a long, painful civil war.

This chapter studies these two cases to draw out a single, big idea: in a democracy, power must be SHARED. Without sharing, a society's diversity becomes its biggest danger.

1.1 BELGIUM AND SRI LANKA

ETHNIC COMPOSITION OF BELGIUM. Belgium is a small country in Europe, smaller in area than the Indian state of Haryana, but with a complex ethnic composition. Of the country's total population, 59 per cent lives in the FLEMISH region and speaks DUTCH. Another 40 per cent of the people live in the WALLONIA region and speak FRENCH. The remaining 1 per cent of the Belgians speak GERMAN. In the capital city BRUSSELS, 80 per cent people speak French while 20 per cent are Dutch-speaking.

The MINORITY French-speaking community was relatively rich and powerful. This was resented by the Dutch-speaking community who got the benefit of economic development and education much later. This led to tensions between the Dutch-speaking and French-speaking communities during the 1950s and 1960s. The tension between the two communities was more acute in BRUSSELS, where the Dutch-speakers were the MINORITY in the capital.

ETHNIC COMPOSITION OF SRI LANKA. The major social groups are the SINHALA-speakers (74 per cent) and the TAMIL-speakers (18 per cent). Among Tamils there are two sub-groups: 'SRI LANKAN TAMILS' (13%, native to the island) and 'INDIAN TAMILS' (5%, brought as plantation workers in the colonial period). Most of the Sinhala-speaking people are BUDDHIST, while most of the Tamils are HINDUS or MUSLIMS. There are about 7 per cent CHRISTIANS, who are both Tamil and Sinhala.

MAJORITARIANISM IN SRI LANKA. Sri Lanka emerged as an independent country in 1948. The leaders of the Sinhala community sought to secure dominance over government by virtue of their majority. As a result, the democratically elected government adopted a series of MAJORITARIAN measures to establish Sinhala supremacy:
• In 1956, an Act was passed to recognise SINHALA as the only official language, thus disregarding Tamil.
• The governments followed preferential policies that favoured Sinhala applicants for university positions and government jobs.
• A new constitution stipulated that the state shall protect and foster BUDDHISM.

All these government measures, coming one after the other, gradually increased the feeling of alienation among the SRI LANKAN TAMILS. They felt that none of the major political parties, led by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders, was sensitive to their language and culture. They felt that the constitution and government policies denied them equal political rights, discriminated against them in getting jobs and other opportunities, and ignored their interests. As a result, the relations between the Sinhala and Tamil communities strained over time.

The Sri Lankan Tamils launched parties and struggles for the recognition of TAMIL as an official language, for regional autonomy and equality of opportunity in securing education and jobs. But their demand for more autonomy to provinces populated by the Tamils was repeatedly DENIED. By the 1980s several political organisations were formed demanding an INDEPENDENT TAMIL EELAM (state) in northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka. The distrust between the two communities turned into widespread conflict. It soon turned into a CIVIL WAR. As a result, thousands of people of both the communities have been killed. Many families were forced to leave the country as refugees and many more lost their livelihood. The civil war caused a terrible setback to the social, cultural and economic life of the country. The civil war ended in 2009.

ACCOMMODATION IN BELGIUM. The Belgian leaders took a DIFFERENT path. They recognised the existence of regional differences and cultural diversities. Between 1970 and 1993, they amended their constitution FOUR TIMES so as to work out an arrangement that would enable everyone to live together within the same country. Although these arrangements are very innovative, they are also very COMPLICATED. The arrangements are hard to understand. So we will look at some of the elements of the model.

CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGES IN BELGIUM:
• Constitution prescribes that the number of Dutch and French-speaking ministers shall be EQUAL in the central government. Some special laws require the support of the majority of members from each linguistic group. Thus, no single community can make decisions UNILATERALLY.
• Many powers of the central government have been given to STATE GOVERNMENTS of the two regions of the country. The state governments are NOT SUBORDINATE to the central government.
• BRUSSELS has a SEPARATE government in which both the communities have equal representation. The French-speaking people accepted equal representation in Brussels because the Dutch-speaking community has accepted equal representation in the central government.
• Apart from the central and the state government, there is a third kind of government. This 'COMMUNITY GOVERNMENT' is elected by people belonging to one language community — Dutch, French and German-speaking — no matter where they live. This government has the power regarding cultural, educational and language-related issues.

The Belgian model is very complicated, even by the standards of Belgium! But these arrangements have worked well so far. They helped to AVOID civic strife between the two major communities and a possible division of the country on linguistic lines. When many countries of Europe came together to form the European Union, BRUSSELS was chosen as its headquarters.

1.2 WHY POWER-SHARING IS DESIRABLE

Two different sets of reasons can be given in favour of power-sharing.

FIRST, power sharing is good because it helps to reduce the possibility of CONFLICT between social groups. Since social conflict often leads to violence and political instability, power sharing is a good way to ensure the stability of the political order. Imposing the will of the majority community over others may look like an attractive option in the short run, but in the long run it undermines the unity of the nation. Tyranny of the majority is not just oppressive for the minority; it often brings ruin to the majority as well. We can call this the PRUDENTIAL reason — based on careful calculation of gains and losses.

SECOND, power sharing is the very SPIRIT of democracy. A democratic rule involves sharing power with those affected by its exercise, and who have to live with its effects. People have a right to be CONSULTED on how they are to be governed. A legitimate government is one where citizens, through participation, acquire a stake in the system. We can call this the MORAL reason — emphasising the very act of power sharing as valuable.

While prudential reasons stress that power sharing will bring out BETTER OUTCOMES, moral reasons emphasise the very act of power sharing as valuable.

1.3 FORMS OF POWER-SHARING

The idea of power-sharing has emerged in opposition to the notions of UNDIVIDED POLITICAL POWER. For a long time it was believed that all power of a government must reside in ONE PERSON or group of persons located at ONE PLACE. It was felt that if the power to decide is dispersed, it would not be possible to take quick decisions and to enforce them. But these notions have changed with the emergence of democracy. One basic principle of democracy is that PEOPLE ARE THE SOURCE OF ALL POLITICAL POWER. In a democracy, people rule themselves through institutions of self-governance.

In a good democratic government, due RESPECT is given to diverse groups and views that exist in a society. Everyone has a voice in the shaping of public policies. Therefore, it follows that in a democracy political power should be distributed among as many citizens as possible.

In modern democracies, power-sharing arrangements can take many forms. Let us look at some of the most common arrangements that we have or will come across.

1. POWER IS SHARED AMONG DIFFERENT ORGANS OF GOVERNMENT — such as the legislature, executive and judiciary. Let us call this HORIZONTAL DISTRIBUTION OF POWER because it allows different organs of government placed at the same level to exercise different powers. Such a separation ensures that none of the organs can exercise unlimited power. Each organ checks the others. This results in a balance of power among various institutions. We have seen this arrangement in our discussion of working of legislature, executive and the judiciary in the previous classes. In a democracy, even though ministers and government officials exercise power, they are responsible to the Parliament or State Assemblies. Similarly, although judges are appointed by the executive, they can check the functioning of executive or laws made by the legislatures. This arrangement is called a system of CHECKS AND BALANCES.

2. POWER CAN BE SHARED AMONG GOVERNMENTS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS — a general government for the entire country and governments at the provincial or regional level. Such a general government for the entire country is usually called FEDERAL government. In India, we refer to it as the CENTRAL or UNION GOVERNMENT. The governments at the provincial or regional level are called by different names in different countries. In India, we call them STATE GOVERNMENTS. This system is not present in all countries. There are many countries where there are NO PROVINCES enjoying powers of their own. But where there are different LEVELS of government, the constitution clearly lays down the powers of different levels of government. This is what they did in Belgium. But this was not the case in Sri Lanka. Such a general division of power involving higher and lower levels of government is called VERTICAL DIVISION OF POWER.

3. POWER MAY ALSO BE SHARED AMONG DIFFERENT SOCIAL GROUPS, such as the religious and linguistic groups. 'COMMUNITY GOVERNMENT' in Belgium is a good example of this arrangement. In some countries there are constitutional and legal arrangements whereby socially weaker sections and women are represented in the legislatures and administration. In our country, we have RESERVED CONSTITUENCIES in assemblies and the Parliament for the SCHEDULED CASTES, SCHEDULED TRIBES and other socially weaker sections. This type of arrangement is meant to give space in the government and administration to diverse social groups who otherwise would feel ALIENATED from the government. This method is used to give MINORITY communities a fair share in power.

4. POWER-SHARING ARRANGEMENTS CAN ALSO BE SEEN IN THE WAY POLITICAL PARTIES, PRESSURE GROUPS AND MOVEMENTS CONTROL OR INFLUENCE THOSE IN POWER. In a democracy, the citizens must have freedom to choose among various contenders for power. In contemporary democracies this takes the form of competition among different parties. Such competition ensures that power does not remain in one hand. In the long run power is shared among different political parties that represent different ideologies and social groups. Sometimes this kind of sharing can be direct, when two or more parties form an ALLIANCE to contest elections. If their alliance is elected, they form a COALITION GOVERNMENT and thus share power. In a democracy, we find INTEREST GROUPS such as those of traders, businessmen, industrialists, farmers and industrial workers. They also will have a share in governmental power, either through participation in governmental committees or bringing influence on the decision-making process.

SUMMARY

Power-sharing is one of the central features of democracy. The chapter compares Belgium — which built a complex but stable model of power-sharing among its Dutch, French and German-speaking communities — with Sri Lanka, where Sinhala majoritarianism led to alienation of Tamils and a long civil war. Two reasons make power-sharing desirable: a PRUDENTIAL reason (it reduces conflict and ensures stability) and a MORAL reason (sharing is the very spirit of democracy). Modern democracies share power in four main forms: HORIZONTAL (legislature, executive, judiciary — checks and balances); VERTICAL (central, state, local levels); among DIFFERENT SOCIAL GROUPS (community governments, reserved constituencies); and among POLITICAL PARTIES, pressure groups and movements (coalitions, free competition). Together these arrangements give every section of society a stake in democratic government — and prevent any single group from imposing its will on the others.
