 
 Senior Secondary Course 
Learner’s Guide, Physics (312) 
1 
Physics (312) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physics: Scope and Excitement 
 The scope of Physics is very wide 
and it covers a vast variety of 
natural phenomena. 
  It includes the study of mechanics, 
heat and thermodynamics, optics, 
waves and oscillations, electricity 
and magnetism, atomic and nuclear 
physics, electronics and 
communication etc. 
Unit of Measurement 
 The laws of physics are expressed 
in terms of physical quantities such 
as distance, speed, time, force, 
volume, electric current, etc. For 
measurement, each physical 
quantity is assigned a unit. 
The SI Units 
 The name SI is abbreviation for 
Système International d’Unitésfor 
the International System of units 
 
 Standards of Mass, Length and 
Time 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quantity unit Symbol 
Length Meter m 
Mass Kilogram Kg 
Time Second s 
Electric 
current 
ampere A 
Temperature 
 
Kelvin K 
Luminous 
intensity 
Candela Cd 
Amount of 
substance 
mole Mol 
 
Mass: 
 The SI unit of mass is kilogram. It is the 
mass of a particular cylinder made of 
platinum-iridium alloy. 
Length: 
The SI unit of length is metre. One metre 
is defined as the distance travelled by light 
in vacuum in a time interval of 
1/299792458 second. 
Time: 
One second is defined as the time required 
for a Cesium - 133 (133Cs) atom to 
undergo 9192631770 vibrations between 
two hyperfine levels of its ground state. 
Significant Figures 
Digits in measurement that are known with 
certainly plus the first uncertain digit are 
called significant figures. 
1 
UNITS, DIMENSIONS AND VECTOR 
 All non-zero digits are significant. For example, 315.58 has five significant figures  All zeros between two nondigits are significant. For example, 5300405.003 has ten significant figures.  All zeros which are to the right of a decimal point and also to the right of a non-zero digit are significant. For example, 50.00 has four significant figures  All zeros to the right of a decimal point and to the left of a nondigit in a decimal fraction are not significant. For example, .00043 has only two significant figures but 2.00023 has 6 significant figures All zero to the right of last of nonzero digit are significant, if they come from some measurement. The number of significant figures does not vary with the change in unit.  In a whole number all zeros to the right of the last non zero number are not significant, for example 5000 has only one sigfigure. Derived Units It is a unit that results from a mathematical combination of SI base unit. Applications of Dimensions (or dimensional equations)    Derivation of a relationship between different pquantities (or formula).    Checking up of accuracy of a formula (or relationship betweendifferent physical quantities).  Conversion of one system of units into another. 
 Senior SecondaryLearner’s Guide, Physics
2 
zero digits are significant. For example, 315.58 has five between two non-zero digits are significant. For example, 5300405.003 has ten significant All zeros which are to the right of a decimal point and also to the right zero digit are significant. For example, 50.00 has four All zeros to the right of a decimal point and to the left of a non-zero digit in a decimal fraction are not significant. For example, .00043 has only two significant figures but 2.00023 has 6 significant figures All zero to the right of last of non-digit are significant, if they come from some measurement. The number of significant figures does not vary with the change in In a whole number all zeros to the right of the last non zero number are not significant, for example 5000 has only one significant It is a unit that results from a mathematical Applications of Dimensions (or Derivation of a relationship between different physical Checking up of accuracy of a formula (or relationship between different physical quantities).  stem of units 
  Derivation of units of a physical quantity Vectors and Scalars A scalar quantity has only magnitude; no direction. A vector quantity has both magnitude and direction. Representation of VectorsA vector is represented by a line with an arrow indicating its direction.𝐴⃗ Addition of Vector If two vectors are represented in magnitude and direction by the two sides of a triangle taken in order, the resultant is represented by the third side of the triangle taken in the opposite order. This is called triangle law of vectors. 𝑅ሬ⃗= 𝐴⃗+ 𝐵ሬ⃗ Subtraction of Vector 𝑅ሬ⃗= 𝐴⃗+ (−𝐵ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗)  
 Secondary Course Learner’s Guide, Physics (312) Derivation of units of a physical A scalar quantity has only magnitude; no A vector quantity has both magnitude and Representation of Vectors A vector is represented by a line with an  If two vectors are represented in magnitude and direction by the two sides a triangle taken in order, the resultant is represented by the third side of the triangle taken in the opposite order. This is called    

 
 Senior Secondary Course 
Learner’s Guide, Physics (312) 
3 
Physics (312) 
Multiplication of Vectors 
Scalar Product of Vector 
The scalar product of two vectors A and B 
is written as A.B and is equal to AB cosθ, 
where θ is the angle between the vectors. 
The scalar product of two vectors is a 
scalar quantity 
Vector Product of Vectors 
The vector product of two vectors A and B 
is written as A×B and is equal to AB sinθ, 
where θ is the angle between the vectors. 
The vector product of two vectors is a 
vector 
Unit Vector 
Unit vector has unitary magnitude and has 
a specified direction. It has no units and no 
dimensions. 
𝐴መ= 𝐴⃗
|𝐴| 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Significant number  in 
42003042.02 is 
A. 15 
B.  10  
C. 7 
D. 5 
2. Dimension of Kinetic energy 
A. ML-1T-2 
B. M2L2T-2 
C. MLT-2 
D. ML2T-2 
3. SI unit of strain is 
A. Nm-1 
B. Nm-2 
C. J 
D. No units 
4. Two forces 20 N and 5 N are 
acting at an angle 200 below 
magnitude of resultant force.  
A. 18.03N 
B. 18.0 N 
C. 17.0 N 
D. 16.5N 
5. Length of (A+B) if A =3𝚤̂ + 2𝚥̂  
and B= 𝚤̂ − 2𝚥̂ + 3𝑘෠ 
A. 4 
B. 3 
C. 5 
D. 7 
 
 
 All constants are 
dimensionless? Explain, 
what types of quantity is 
Avogadro’s number. 
 Is the commutative and 
associative law applicable 
to vector subtraction? 
Explain 
 The velocity of sound in 
air is 332m/s if the unit of 
length is km and unit of 
time is hour. What would 
be the value of velocity? 
 
 
 
1B) 2D) 3D) 4A) 5C) 
 
CHECK YOURSELF 
STRETCH YOURSELF 
Answer to check Yourself 
