 Senior Secondary Course Learner’s Guide, Physics (312)  
1 
     Projectile Motion  The motion which has constant velocity in a certain direction and constant acceleration in a direction perpendicular to that of velocity The two important properties of a projectile motion are : (i) a constant horizontal velocity component  (ii)  a constant vertically downward acceleration component.  Maximum height, time of flight and range of a projectile Maximum height At the instant when the projectile is at the maximum height, the vertical component of its velocity is zero. h= ௩బమ௦௜௡ഇమଶ௚  
   The total time for which the projectile is in the air. This is termed as the time of flight Time of Flight The time of flight of a projectile is the time interval between the instant of its launch and the instant when it hits the ground. 𝑇 =2𝑣଴sin 𝜃଴𝑔 Range the path of any projectile launched at an angle to the horizontal is a parabola or a portion of a parabola. 𝑅 =  𝑣଴ଶsin 2𝜃଴𝑔 The trajectory of a projectile 𝑦 = 𝑦௢+(tan 𝜃)(𝑥 − 𝑥଴)−𝑔2[(𝑣଴cos 𝜃଴)ଶ](𝑥− 𝑥଴)ଶ Circular Motion It is a movement of object along the circumference of a circle along a circular path 𝒗𝒂𝒗=∆𝒓∆𝒕 Uniform Circular Motion 
4 MOTION IN A PLANE  
 uniform circular motion is motion with constant speed in a circle.V=log∆௧→଴∆ೝ∆೟ Centripetal Acceleration a =௩మ௥ v= rω F = ௠௩మ௥ F = 𝑚𝑟𝜔ଶ Acceleration = Rate of change of velocity Applications of Uniform Circular Motion An important thing to understand and remember is that the term ‘centripetal force’ does not refer to a type of force of interaction like the force of gravitation or electrical force. Banking of Roads 𝐹ேsin 𝜃 =𝑚𝑣ଶ𝑟 𝐹ேcos 𝜃 = 𝑚𝑔 𝜃 = tanିଵ𝑣ଶ𝑟𝑔  
 Senior SecondaryLearner’s Guide, Physics (312)
2 
uniform circular motion is motion with constant speed in a circle.   Acceleration = Rate of change of f Uniform Circular An important thing to understand and remember is that the term ‘centripetal force’ does not refer to a type of force of interaction like electrical 
AIRCRAFTS IN VERTICAL LOOPS𝑁 = 𝑚ቆ𝑔 +𝑣ଶ𝑟ቇ  1. A shell is fired at an angle of 600  to the horizontal direction with a velocity of 392 ms-1 time of flight isA. 68.235 B. 69.235 C. 70.235 D. 71.235 2. A body is projected with a velocity of 40ms-1crosses a tower of height 20.4m. angle of projection isA. 450 B. 300 C. 900 D. 600 3. Centripetal force acting on the particle is givenA. F=mrω2 B. F=mr2ω2 C. F=m/rω2 D. F=mr/ω 4. In a circular motion.A. Speed is constant
CHECK YOURSELF
Senior Secondary Course Physics (312)  AIRCRAFTS IN VERTICAL LOOPS  ቇ A shell is fired at an angle of to the horizontal direction with a velocity of time of flight is A body is projected with a 1 after 2s it crosses a tower of height 20.4m. angle of projection is Centripetal force acting on the particle is given In a circular motion. Speed is constant 
CHECK YOURSELF 
 Senior Secondary Course 
Learner’s Guide, Physics (312) 
 
3 
Physics (312) 
B. Speed and velocity 
constant 
C. Velocity is constant 
D. None of the above 
5. Range of the projectile is 
expressed as 
A. 𝑅=𝑉଴ sin𝜃 
B. 𝑅=  ௩బమ ୱ୧୬ ଶఏబ
௚  
C. 𝑅=  ௩బమ ୱ୧ బ
௚  
D. 𝑅=  ௩బమ ୱ୧୬ ଶఏబ
ଶ௚  
 
 
 
 
1. Why does a bike rider bend 
inward while taking a turn 
on a circular path? 
2. A stone tied at the end of 
string is whirled in a circle. If 
the string breaks, the stone 
flies away tangentially why? 
3. What is uniform circular 
motion explain 
4. Find a time of flight max 
height, horizontal range of 
projection with speed 𝑣଴ 
making an angle  with 
horizontal direction form 
ground. 
5. A car is rounding a curve of 
radius 100 m at a speed of 
70kmh-1 what is the 
centripetal force on a 
passenger of mass m=100kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1B) 2B) 3A) 4A) 5A) 
 
 
STRETCH YOURSELF 
Answer to check yourself 
