 
 
NIOS/Acad./2020/312/04/E 
National Institute of Open Schooling 
Senior Secondary 
Lesson 4 – Motion in a Plane 
Worksheet-4 
 
Q1. Observe your surroundings and give examples of Projectile Motion from day to day life. 
  
Q2. Take two balls and p roject one of them horizontally from the top of the building. At the 
same time drop the other ball downward from the same height. Observe the path of both 
balls and time to hit the ground. Is it same? Explain with reasons. 
 
Q3. Take a ball and project the ball horizontally from the top of the building. Observe the 
projectile motion of ball and explain with reason  which two quantities are constant 
throughout projectile motion when air resistance is negligible? 
 
Q4. Suppose you want to launch a projectile to land at a certain target, for instance, a cricket 
ball beyond the boundary . What are the important factors you have to calculate before 
launching the projectile? Analyze projectile motion to determine all these factors. 
 
Q5. Suppose you are riding a bicycle along a Circular path of the Park near the house. Measure 
the radius of Circular Path. Count the time to complete one round and calculate the total 
length of the Circular Path. 
 
Q6. Take three stones and throw them at different angles such that they reach the same 
maximum height as shown in the given figure. 
                   
Observe the trajectories of all three projectiles and calculate for all three stones 
a)  Time of Flight  
b) A constant horizontal velocity component  
c) A constant vertically downward acceleration component 
Observe and explain are these same for all three stones. 
  
Q7. Continue to Q.6 Derive the equation of path of projectile motion and equation of trajectory. 
 
Q8. Observe your surroundings and give examples of Uniform Circular Motion from day to 
day life. Explain applications of Uniform Circular Motion in day to day life. 

 
 
Q9. A truck goes around a circular track of radius R at speed v so that it makes one circuit 
every T seconds As it does so it experiences a centripetal acceleration of magnitude p. If 
the truck now goes around a different circular track of radius 4R so that it now takes a time 
½T to go around once, what is the magnitude of its centripetal acceleration? 
 
Q10. Explain in your own words what is meant by centripetal acceleration? Derive an 
expression for the same. 
