 
 
NIOS/Acad./2020/212/02/E 
National Institute of Open Schooling 
Lesson 2 - Matter in our Surroundings 
Worksheet-2 
Q1. Observe your daily routine and make a list of things you smell, eat, drink and use throughout 
the day. Observe is there any similarity in material used throughout the day? 
Q2. A solid is defined as “a matter with definite size and shape which do not change on their 
own”. Take a rubber band and stretch it, you will ob serve that it changes its shape on 
stretching? Is it a solid? Support your answer with suitable reasons. 
Q3. Take different matters from your surroundings and classify the matter in different ways and 
make a table as below - 
Name of the Matter Solid Liquid Gas 
Book Solid - - 
    
Comment why different matter have different states of matter?  
Q4. Take water in liquid state and heat the water gradually till temperature 1000C. Secondly cool 
the water till temperature 0 0C. Write your observations. Plot the temperature versus time 
graph of water. (Do the experiment in the presence of guardian) 
Q5. Continue to  the Q4 – explain why the temperature of water remains constant during its 
boiling point? 
Q6. Take different matters from your surroundings and classify the matter in different ways and 
make a table as below -  
Name of the Matter Elements Compound Mixture 
Mango Shake - - Mixture 
    
Write different points which differentiate Elements, Compounds and Mixture. 
Q7. Imagine there is any matter say “Matter A”. “Matter A” can be compressed easily by 
applying pressure. “Matter A” expands with increase in temperature and contracts with 
decrease in temperature. Name and explain the Nature of “Matter A”. 
Q8. In ancient time, when there was no water purifier, explain different methods to purify the 
water for drinking purpose used by our forefathers. Support your answer why these methods 
were used to purify the water. 
 
 
Q9. Observe your mother throughout the day and make a list when she is using different 
methods to purify or to separate substances or anything else . Explain anyone method used 
by her in detail. 
Q10. Make a mixture of “Iron + Sugar + Sand ” and another mixture of “Lemon Juice + Sugar + 
Water”. Observe both the mixture and comment how mixtures are different in nature. Is it 
possible to separate both the mixtures? If Yes, Name and explain method of separation.       
If Not, support your answer with suitable reasons. 
