MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 22
1
ANCIENT WORLD
Go to the market or to the railway station, sit in your home or stand on the road
and look around you. You will find many things where metal is being used. This metal
could be copper, bronze, iron or any other may be steel. Steel is a refined form of
iron only. Discovery of metals brought profound and dramatic changes in the lives
of people.
You have read about pre-history in the introductory lesson. You have learnt that during
the Stone Age human learnt to make tools and weapons of stone, bone and wood.
They lived in caves and found food by hunting and food-gathering. Later, they learnt
about agriculture, domestication of animals and led a settled life. The Stone Age was
followed by the Metal Ages – Bronze Age and Iron Age. It was with the discovery
of metal that human civilisation became highly evolved. During the Bronze Age,
advanced civilisations came up in Mesopotamia, China, Egypt and India. We will
read about these civilisations in some detail in this lesson. We will also read about
the Iron Age Civilisations in Greece, Rome and Persia, as well as India.
Isn’t it surprising that the use of iron started so long back. We still use iron in some
way or the other, don’t we? Look around you and you will find many things made
of iron and steel. We all have steel utensils in our homes. Steel is a refined form of
iron.
Further, we will read in detail about Ancient India, about the emperors and dynasties
that ruled India during that period. You will realize that India’s contribution to human
civilisation is immense. Isn’t it interesting and exciting to know about our glorious
past? Let us start the journey into our past and know how we humans have travelled
through the ages and evolved into sophisticated, advanced and highly civilised people.
OBJECTIVES
After reading this lesson, you will be able to:
/circle6describe the contributions of ancient Bronze Age Civilisations – Mesopotamian,
Chinese, Egyptian and Indus Valley;

MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 23SOCIAL SCIENCE
/circle6recognize the contributions of the Iron Age Civilisations – Greek, Roman and
Persian;
/circle6explain the important developments in Indian history from the Vedic Age down
to the time of Harsha;
/circle6examine the different aspects of India’s contribution to world civilisation;
1.1 THE BRONZE AGE
Towards the end of the New Stone Age, began the use of metal. Copper was the
first metal used by them. The cultures based on the use of both stone and copper
are called Chalcolithic Cultures. This is also called Bronze Age because of the
invention of bronze in this period which is an alloy of copper and tin. Gradually copper
and bronze replaced stone, wood, and bones to some extent for making weapons
and implements. People learnt how to make bricks and use them in construction.
These bricks were baked and sun dried. Town-based civilisations came up for the
first time in different river valleys. These towns became centers of trade, commerce
and administration. The Bronze Age people had built up great civilisations and made
significant contributions. In this section, we will read about four major Bronze Age
Civilisations of the world, that is, Mesopotamia, Egypt, India and China.
1.1.1 Mesopotamian Civilisation
Mesopotamia was the land lying between two rivers, Tigris and Euphrates, which
lie in modern day Iraq. These rivers were often in flood and in this process they
deposited a lot of silt which made the land around them very fertile. This resulted
in increased food production. The abundant agricultural produce enabled the growth
of a number of crafts persons like smiths, potters masons, weavers and carpenters.
They sold their products and got their necessities from others in exchange. They
carried on trade with far-off places like India. Carts, wagons, boats and ships were
used for transport and communication. They also developed the art of writing. Their
script was a collection of symbols and pictures. They drew wedge-like lines and so
this script came to be known as Cuneiform script.
The earliest cities of Mesopotamia were like small states, each with its own
administration. The ruling class consisted of priests, kings and aristocrats. Besides
them there were merchants, ordinary people and the slaves. The people of
Mesopotamia worshipped many gods and goddesses like sky, sun, moon, fertility,
etc. Each city had its own patron god or goddess.
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 24
Figure 1.1  Cuneiform Script
1.1.2 Egyptian Civilisation
Another civilisation arose in Egypt, along the River Nile, which made the land very
fertile. The Egyptian kings were called Pharaohs. They had ministers and officers in
their service that administered the land and collected taxes for them. The priests
enjoyed a very high and honorable position in society. Temples were dedicated to
a particular god in each town or city. The ancient Egyptian script was called
Hieroglyphics. Traders and merchants carried on their business both on land and
water. There were skilled workers like stone-cutters and carpenters. Egyptians had
considerable knowledge of weights and measures.
The Pharaohs built the great monuments of the ancient world – the Pyramids. Since
the Egyptians believed in afterlife, they preserved the dead bodies. These were called
mummies. The pyramids were built as tombs to keep the mummified bodies of the
dead kings.
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 25SOCIAL SCIENCE
Figure 1.2  Hieroglyphics Script
1.1.3 Chinese Civilisation
The Chinese civilisation grew up in the Hwang Ho valley in North China. The first
rulers known were the Shangs (1523 BC to 1122 BC), who built China’s first cities.
They also contributed to art and culture. The Chinese writing system was developed
during this period. Craftspersons of this period, especially the bronze workers were
great experts in their fields.
The Shang dynasty was overthrown by the Zhous, who built strong forts and walled
towns to defend themselves from invaders. It was during the later phase of the Zhou
rule that iron was introduced, thus ending the Bronze Age in China.
In 221 BC, the Chin rulers came to power in China. They ordered the use of common
language, common laws and common weights and measures throughout their empire.
Do you know that they were the rulers who built the famous Great Wall of China?
After the Chins, the Han dynasty came to power, who ruled till AD 220. It was during
this period that Chinese traders had contact with the West through the famous Silk
Route, crossing Central Asia and Persia.
The people of China worshipped a number of deities. Worship of ancestors, nature
and spirits were very common. In China a famous religious preacher named Confucius
advocated a system of right behavior, which greatly influenced Chinese society and
government. He laid emphasis on good moral character, respect to elders and loyalty
to the family and obedience to the laws of the State.
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 26
ACTIVITY 1.1
Did you notice that all the major civilisations arose on the banks of rivers? Identify
some important towns which rose on the banks of some rivers. Can you think of
at least two reasons what made these towns more successful than those which were
not on any river bank?
1.2 INDIA: INDUS V ALLEY CIVILISATION
Do you know that India was also part of the Bronze Age Civilisations, which
flourished in the valley of river Indus and neighboring regions? This ancient civilisation
was discovered when archaeologists began excavating the sites connected with it in
the 1920s. The first sites to be excavated were Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro. That
is why it is also called Harappa Civilisation. At present, hundreds of sites of this culture
are known. The most important cities were Harappa (Western Punjab), Mohenjo-
Daro (Sindh), Lothal (Gujarat), Kalibangan (Rajasthan), Ropar (Punjab), Banawali
and Rakhigarhi (Haryana), and Dholavira (Gujarat).
1.2.1 Town Planning
One of the most interesting features of this civilisation was the emergence of the first
urban societies in South Asia. The most remarkable aspect was the high level of
sophistication in town planning, crafts and culture. The people lived in well-planned
cities. A general feature of the cities was the presence of a fortified citadel which
housed public buildings. The cities had wide roads, which cut each other at right
angles. The houses were brick – built and most of these were two-storied. There
were wells, baths, drains and sewage in each house. Paved roads and street lightings
were also known. Apart from the living houses in the lower town, big multi–pillared
halls have also been discovered at the citadel area in Mohenjo-Daro. Here, the most
striking feature was the Great Bath (180 ft long and 108 ft long and 108 ft wide).
The bathing pool in it was 39 feet long, 23 feet wide and 8 feet deep. The Great
Granary of Harappa was another important building. The surplus produced by the
peasants was stored here.
1.2.2 Society and Economy
The people practiced agriculture, animal husbandry, art and crafts, trade and
commerce. Main crops were wheat, barley, rye, sesame and pea. Evidence of rice
has been found at Lothal and Rangpur. Furrow marks found at Kalibangan show
that ploughing was known to them. Sickles were used for harvesting. Various forms
of irrigation were practiced. Cotton was a known product. Animals like cows, goats,
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 27SOCIAL SCIENCE
sheep, humped bulls, dogs, cats, camels and donkeys were domesticated. The people
consumed cereals, fish, meat, milk, egg and fruit. Tools and weapons made from
copper and bronze were mostly used. Ornaments were made of gold, silver, precious
and semi-precious stones, conch and ivory. Iron was not known to them. Among
artisans and craftsperson, there were potters, weavers, masons, carpenters, smiths,
jewelers, sculptors, stone cutters, brick-makers and terracotta manufacturers. Trade
and commerce were also very important economic activities. Both inter-regional trade
and external trade were carried out. Several evidences point to Harappa trade with
Mesopotamia. Main imports consisted of metals like gold, tin, copper and various
kinds of precious and semi-precious stones. Among the exports were agricultural
products, cotton goods, potteries, jewelleries, ivory products and other crafts.
Harappa seals were probably used for commercial purposes. The society was
divided into classes.
1.2.3 Religion and Culture
The cult of Mother Goddess seems to have been very popular among them. Many
figurines of Mother Goddess have been found. One male deity has also been found
at Mohenjo-Daro which has been called the prototype of Lord Shiva (Pashupati).
This deity is represented in a seal, sitting in a yogic posture and surrounded by animals.
Lingam worship and nature worship of trees were prevalent. Can you see the
similarities in the religious practices among the Hindus in India even today? When
you visit a Shiva temple, you can see that Shiva lingam is worshipped. You must be
aware that Hindus also worship trees like Peepal.
1.2.4 Technical Skills
They had also acquired high levels of technical skill. They had knowledge of urban
engineering, weights and measures, health and hygiene. They also knew how to write.
They used a script which has not yet been deciphered.
1.2.5 Decline
It is difficult to say what actually caused the ultimate decline of this civilisation. Natural
calamities seem to be the most important cause of the decline of this civilisation.
Recurring floods, drying up of rivers, decreasing soil fertility, deforestation due to
constant consumption of wood, earthquakes, scanty rainfall, extension of desert seem
to have played havoc with this civilisation. According to some scholars, the decline
of overseas trade with Mesopotamia may have contributed to the decline of this
civilisation. With its decline, literacy and urban life disappeared in India for more than
a thousand years.
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 28
INTEXT QUESTIONS 1.1
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) Society in Bronze Age civilisation was divided into .....................
(b)  ..................... seems to be the most important cause of the decline of
Harappa Civilisation.
(c) The Harappa people had overseas trade with .....................
2. Which was the first metal used by human beings?
3. Name the rivers between which the Mesopotamian Civilisation was founded.
4. Name the ancient Egyptian script.
5. Name at least four sites of the Harappa Civilisation situated in India.
1.3 IRON AGE CIVILISATION
Iron Age began about 3000 years ago when it came to be produced on a large scale
and its use became common. It was much cheaper and stronger than copper and
bronze. So, the use of iron tools and implements enabled our forefathers to clear
forests and to reclaim lands for the extension of cultivation. Agricultural production
thus increased considerably. This brought radical changes in the social and economic
life of the people.
The use of iron had a great impact on transport and communication. Iron rims and
spokes were used in wheels to make them stronger. Iron nails and sheets were widely
used for making boats and ships. Trade and commerce flourished. This trade brought
prosperity. New weapons of war like the use of long, heavy sword, sabre/saber,
iron-shield, spear and lance changed the methods of warfare.
The Iron Age was also a period of intellectual progress. The most important
development was the beginning of alphabets. This replaced the old pictographic style
of writing about which you have already read in the Bronze Age Civilisations of Egypt,
Mesopotamia and China. The Civilisations that flourished during the Iron Age were
Greece, Rome, Persia and India. They were much more advanced than the earlier
civilisations. Let us now read about them in some detail in this section.
1.3.1 Greek Civilisation
Greek Civilisation flourished in Greece more than 2000 years ago. There arose many
independent city-states, which developed a remarkable system of government. The
development of city-state was a unique feature of Greek civilisation. Each city was
enclosed by a wall for protection. Inside the city, there was a fort called Acropolis
which was situated on a hill top.
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 29SOCIAL SCIENCE
Among the Greek city-states, the most famous were Athens and Sparta. Athens was
rich and cultured. Athenian citizens included writers, philosophers, artists and thinkers.
The society was based on slave labor, but the citizens enjoyed a democratic form
of government. You will read about Democracy in detail the later lessons. Sparta
was almost like an army camp, where everyone was expected to obey the superiors.
Sparta had the best army in Greece. Training in warfare was considered to be the
most important thing here.
There was considerable rivalry between Athens and Sparta. But they fought side by
side to drive off the mighty Persian army of Darius I and Xerxes, who tried to conquer
Greece. Under Pericles, Athens enjoyed a ‘Golden Age’. But a long war between
Athens and Sparta, called the Peloponnesian War, which lasted for 27 years resulted
in the defeat of Athens.
Do you know that Ancient Greece had the distinction of being called the birth place
of Western Civilisation? They were pioneers in art and learning, science, literature
and sculpture. Socrates, Plato and Aristotle were great philosophers whose works
are studied even today. Herodotus and Thucydides were famous historians.
Archimedes, Aristarchus and Democritus were great scientists. Aeschylus, Sophocles
and Aristophanes were great dramatists. Homer was the author of the famous epics
- Iliad and Odyssey.
The Greeks also had great knowledge of architecture. They built many beautiful
temples and palaces. The Greeks believed in many gods. Each city had its own
protector god or goddess. The gods were believed to live on Mount Olympus. The
Olympic Games, first recorded in 776 BC was held every four years at a place called
Olympia. Sports and athletic events were held to honor Zeus, the king of gods.
The Greek towns were the centers of administration as well as cultural and economic
activities. The farmers mainly grew grapes, olives and grain. Wine and olive oil were
important products. The Greeks, at one time, also established vast empires.
Alexander of Macedonia, better known to history as Alexander the Great, led his
army out of Europe and conquered Syria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Afghanistan and even
parts of Central Asia and North-Western India. This led to the spread of Greek ideas
and learning. Alexander died at an age of thirty-three only. After his death, his empire
broke up into smaller kingdoms. Later, Greece was conquered by the Romans.
1.3.2 Roman Civilisation
In 510 BC, the Romans set up a Republic on the city of Rome which is on river
Tiber in Central Italy. The Roman Republic was ruled by the senate, which consisted
of a group of elders called senators. They elected two Consuls each year to lead
them. By 200 BC, Rome became the leading power of Italy. It was able to defeat
rivals like Carthage for the control of the Mediterranean world.
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 30
In the early Roman society, there were three classes of people – the patricians
(aristocrats), the plebeians (commoners) and the slaves. Roman economy was based
on slave labor. Rich Romans owned slaves. These slaves were often trained for the
gladiators’ fight, which was a fight between the slaves and wild animals. There
were also frequent slave revolts in Rome. One such revolt was led by Spartacus
in 74 BC.
Although Rome was a Republic, strong and influential leaders fought for power. Julius
Caesar was one such leader who got enormous power and became a dictator. In
44 BC, Caesar was murdered and a civil war broke out. After the war, Augustus
Caesar became the first emperor of Rome. The Roman Empire spread to three
continents – Europe, Asia and Africa. Do you know that it was during the rule of
Augustus, the great prophet, Jesus Christ appeared? He was the founder of
Christianity. He was born in Bethlehem. According to him, all men and women are
the children of God. He taught people to love each other. After his death, the followers
of Christ spread his teachings among the people. At its peak, the Roman Empire
stretched from Mesopotamia in the east to Gaul and Britain in the west. People
throughout the Empire adopted Roman way of living. Towns with baths, temples,
palaces and theatres were built. In the countryside, the Romans built huge,
comfortable farmhouses called villas. Roman rulers used to preside over victory
parades, religious ceremonies and games in the arenas and amphitheatres. Gladiator’s
fight, chariot racing, and theatre were some of the common amusements.
Figure 1.4  Roman Colosseum/Amphitheatre
The Roman Empire was divided into several provinces, each ruled by a governor.
He had a number of officers under him who looked after different affairs of
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 31SOCIAL SCIENCE
administration. The main fighting forces of the Roman army were the legions. Each
legion had 5000 soldiers headed by a commander. The Roman Empire was governed
by the personal will of the emperor. But his power depended on the army. Weak
emperors were often overthrown by the army generals.
By 395 AD, the huge Roman Empire was divided into two halves for better
governance. The Eastern part with capital at Byzantium survived even after the fall
of the Western Roman Empire in the face of barbarian invasion in 476 AD. Emperor
Constance gave Byzantium a new name – Constantinople. It became the home of
Eastern Orthodox Christian faith and the capital city of the Byzantine emperors.
ACTIVITY 1.2
You have read about the famous gladiators’ fight in this lesson. You must have also
watched some of them on television or in the movies. Did you feel good watching
them? Do you think it is a human practice to watch people suffer and find amusement
from it? What would your thoughts be on the same? Write in about 50 words.
1.3.3 Persian Civilisation
In the Iron Age, Persia (Modern Iran) was inhabited by the Aryan communities. One
branch of them, known as the Medes, settled in the western part of the country.
Another branch occupied the southern and eastern parts and was called the Persians.
The Medes built up a powerful kingdom covering a vast area of Iran. At first, the
Persians also had to acknowledge the supremacy of the Medes. One of the Persian
kings, Cyrus, united the Persians in 550 BC. He built a powerful army and
successfully conquered Babylon, Assyria and Asia Minor. Darius I was the greatest
emperor of Persia. He belonged to the Achaemenian dynasty. His empire stretched
from River Indus to the Eastern shores of Mediterranean Sea. He made Persepolis
his capital in 518 BC. During his reign, Persian art, architecture and sculpture
flourished. He also built a powerful navy.
The Persian emperors were able administrators. They divided their empire into
provinces, each governed by a Satrap or Governor. The Persians were good soldiers
with strong cavalry, navy and had iron weapons. Though the Persians were defeated
by Alexander the Great in 331 BC, their civilisation did not come to an end. Their
culture and civilisation continued to flourish under the Parthian and Sassanian
emperors. But ultimately they were conquered by the Arabs in 7
th century AD.
Like the Indo-Aryans, the early Persians worshipped the forces of nature. They
believed in the sun god, sky god and other gods. They considered fire to be a symbol
of holiness. They also performed fire rites and practiced animal sacrifices. Later, a
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 32
religious preacher Zoroaster found the religion called Zoroastrianism. He taught them
about Ahura-Mazda, the Lord of Heaven and Light, who gives men strength and
energy. According to Zoroaster, life was a constant struggle between good (light)
and evil (darkness). The holy scripture of the Persians is called Zend – Avesta.
INTEXT QUESTION 1.2
1. Name the three spheres where the impact of iron implements were felt the most.
2. Name two important city states in Greece.
3. Name the river on which the city of Rome is situated.
4. Complete the sentences below:
a) Constantinople was the capital of the .....................
b) The Persian king who united the Persians was .....................
c) The Indo-Aryans and the early Persians worshipped the .....................
1.4 INDIA: THE VEDIC AGE
The Vedic Age marks a new phase in ancient Indian History which began with the
arrival of the Aryans in India around 1500 BC. It lasted for almost a thousand years,
in the course of which a number of economic, social, political and religious
developments took place. The Vedic Age is accordingly divided into two periods
of about equal duration - Early Vedic Period and Later Vedic Period.
Have you heard of the Vedas? They are the most important source of information
on the Vedic Age. The Early Vedic period is known mainly from the Rig Veda, which
was the first Veda to be composed. For this period, when the Vedic tribes lived in
northwest part of the subcontinent including Punjab and Afghanistan, we do not have
much archaeological evidence. This was probably because the Early Vedic people
generally led a nomadic life and did not stay for long at any place. Their economy
was mainly pastoral. Cattle-rearing was the chief means of livelihood. Horses, goats
and sheep were also important. A little agriculture was also practiced. Family, clan
and tribes (called Janas) were the social units, and there were no castes. The chief
of the tribe was called Raja. Popular assemblies of all members of the Janas, called
Sabhas and Samitis, had an important say in public affairs. A number of deities were
worshipped, Indra being the most important of them.
The Later Vedic period is known in much greater detail from the vast corpus of Later
Vedic literature as well as from archeological material. The Later V edic literature
comprised of the following books, that is, the three V edas – Sama Veda, Yajur V eda
and Atharva Veda. There were also commentaries on all the four V edas called
Brahmanas, Aranyakas and Upanishads.
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 33SOCIAL SCIENCE
A large number of sites belonging to this period have also been excavated. They are
all marked by a typical pottery called Painted Grey Ware (PGW), and so are known
as PGW sites.
During the Later Vedic period, there was a large scale eastward movement of the
Aryan communities to Indo-Gangetic Doab and Upper Ganga plains. Towards the
end of the period, three important kingdoms came up further East: Kashi, Koshala
and Videha. Agriculture was now the main occupation, and number of crops including
rice, wheat and sugarcane were grown. Crafts also multiplied, iron weapons and tools
were introduced. People now led a settled life in villages. Castes began to emerge
and crystallise in the form of four Varnas - Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and
Shudras. The powers of the king and his men increased, and those of the assembly
were proportionately undermined. Sacrifices now became very elaborate. The
importance of the god Indra receded; new gods such as Prajapati figured prominently.
Towards the end of this period, a reaction to the sacrificial ritual could also be
observed which we find mentioned in the Upanishads.
ACTIVITY 1.3
Read the passage given below and answer the questions that follow:
The Various Means of Livelihood (Extract from Rig Veda, IX, 112)
We all have various thoughts and plan, and diverse are the ways of men.
The Brahman seeks the worshipper; the carpenter/takshan looks for the cracked
(wood, to repair); the physician/bhishaj, the injured (to treat).
The smith/karmara with ripe and seasoned plants, and with birds’ feathers,
With stones and with enkindled fire, seeks one who has a store of gold.
I am a poet/karu, my father’s a physician, and my mother grinds grain upon the stone.
1. List the various occupations mentioned in the passage.
2. What kind of society does it depict?
3. Are the occupation hereditary based? Why or why not?
4. What kind of work did the women folk engaged in?
1.4.1 The Post-Vedic Age
In the 6th century BC there came up large territorial states in northern and eastern
India known as the Mahajanapadas. There were sixteen such states namely Anga,
Magadha, Vajji, Kashi, Koshala, Malla, Kuru, Panchala, Vatsa, Avanti, Kamboja,
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 34
Gandhara, Assaka, Chedi, Matsya, and Shurasena. Among them Magadha, Kosala
and Avanti were the most powerful. The extension of agriculture, growth of trade
and industries, rise of territorial states and beginning of urbanization gave rise to new
forces in the society. Thus the 6
th century BC was also a period of socio- religious
transformation. People expressed their dissatisfaction against the ritualistic Brahmanism
and Vedic sacrifices. There emerged numerous sects and reformatory movements.
This period called the Ancient Period in History saw the rise of two important religions
called Jainism and Buddhism.
1.4.2 Buddhism
Gautama Buddha, the founder of Buddhism, was born in 563 BC at Lumbini which
is situated near the Indo-Nepal Border. He was the son of Shuddhodhana, the chief
of Shakya of Kapilavastu. At the age of 29, Gautama left home and attained Bodhi
(enlightenment) at Bodhgaya under a pipal tree. He delivered his first sermon at
Sarnath near Varanasi. His teachings included four Noble Truths (Arya Satya) and
Eightfold Path (Ashtangika Marga).
According to Buddha:
(i) the world is full of misery (dukkha);
(ii) desire (trishna) is the cause of this misery;
(iii) if desire is conquered, then all sorrows can be removed;
(iv) this can be done by following the Eight fold Path; which included:
(a) right memory (b) right aim (c) right speech
(d) right action (e) right livelihood (f) right efforts
(g) right memory and (h) right meditation
Buddha suggested a ‘Middle Path’ - away from both extreme luxury as well as
extreme austerity. He also laid down a code of conduct such as non-killing and non-
stealing for his followers. He died at the age of 80 (483 BC) at Kushinagar in Uttar
Pradesh.
1.4.3 Jainism
Rishabhanath, the first Tirthankara, is known to be the founder of Jainism.
Vardhamana Mahavira was the 24
th Tirthankara of this sect, Parshvanath being the
23rd one. Mahavira was born in 540 BC at Kundagram near Vaishali (Bihar). His
father was the Chief of Jhatrika Kshatriya clan. Mahavira became an ascetic at the
age of 30 years and died at Pawapuri in 468 BC near Rajagriha. His followers came
to be known as ‘Jainas’.
Jainism had no place for a supreme creator. It recognized the existence of gods, but
placed them lower than the Jaina teachers. The main aim of Jainism is the attainment
of freedom from worldly bonds. Like Buddhism, Jainism opposed the ritualistic
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 35SOCIAL SCIENCE
practices and evils of Vedic Brahmanism. It also opposed the caste system and
accepted the doctrine of Karma and rebirth. Jainism has five cardinal principles:
(i) Ahimsa or non-violence, (ii) T ruthfulness,
(iii) Abstention from stealing, (iv) Non-attachment, and
(v) Celibacy or Brahmacharya.
The three jewels (Triratna) of Jainism are:
(a) Right vision (Samyak Darshana),
(b) Right knowledge (Samyak Jnana), and
(c) Right Conduct (Samyak Charita)
ACTIVITY 1.4
Reflect on the teachings of Buddha and Mahavira. Think of at least three teachings
which you find to be relevant and can be practiced in your daily life. Share your
thoughts and experiences with your family and friends.
1.5 THE MAURYAN AGE (322 BC-184 BC)
Out of the sixteen Mahajanapadas, it was Magadha that expanded considerably
under powerful rulers like Bimbisara, Ajatashatru and Mahapadmananda. The last
king of the Nanda dynasty was defeated by Chandragupta Maurya in 322 BC He
established the Maurya Empire uprooting Greeks from the Punjab and Nandas from
the Gangetic Plains. By a continuous process of conquest and annexation he was
able to unify almost the whole of India. Chandragupta ruled from 322 BC to 297
BC. He embraced Jainism under the influence of Bhadrabahu. He died at
Sravanabelgola near Mysore.
Bindusara (297 BC-272 BC), the son and successor of Chandragupta Maurya, was
also known as Mitraghata (slayer of enemies). He is said to have conquered Deccan,
extending Mauryan control as far as Mysore. He also had contacts with Antiochus
I, the Greek ruler of West Asia. It appears from the Buddhist literature that after
the death of Bindusara, there was a struggle for the throne among his sons.
Ashoka (272 BC-236 BC) emerged victorious in this fratricidal war of succession
and ascended the throne of Magadha. An important event of his reign was the famous
Kalinga War in 260 BC mentioned in his Rock Edict XIII. Later, Ashoka, embraced
Buddhism, and gave up war. He was a benevolent ruler and did many things for the
welfare of his subjects. His policy of ‘dhamma’ was based on religious toleration,
respect to elders, care for the old, kindness, truthfulness and purity. It was through
his efforts that Buddhism spread beyond the boundaries of India. The rock edicts
and pillar edicts inscribed by him give a detailed account of his reign.
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 36
After Ashoka’s death, his empire disintegrated into pieces. There was also the danger
of foreign invasion. The economic condition of the country deteriorated. The last king
of the Maurya dynasty was Brihadratha.
Figure 1.4  Locations of the Various Edicts of Ashoka
1.6 THE SANGAM AGE (300 BC-200 AD)
With the Sangam Age, the historical period began in South India. The word ‘Sangam’
means an assembly of scholars of literacy figures, held under the royal patronage
of Pandyan kings of Madurai. Early Tamil literature comprised works such as
Tolkappiyam, the Eight Anthologies (Ettutogai) the ‘ten Idylls’ (pattupattu), the
‘Eighteen Minor Works’ and the three Epics (Shilappadikaram, Manimekalai and
Sivaga Sindamani). The Sangam Age extends roughly between 300 BC to 200 A.D.
Sangam literature refers primarily to Pandyan Kingdom. But it also contains valuable
information about the Chola and Chera kingdoms. The Pandyas ruled over an area
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 37SOCIAL SCIENCE
comprising southern Tamil Nadu. Madurai was their capital. The Cheras ruled over
Kerala and the Cholas occupied Northern Tamil Nadu and Southern Andhra
Pradesh.
1.7 THE KUSHANA AGE
After the fall of the Mauryan Empire, a number of foreign powers like the Bactrian
Greeks, the Shakas, the Parthians and the Kushanas invaded India. They ruled in
the western and north-western parts of India. The Kushanas were a branch of the
Yue-Chi tribe of Central Asia. The first ruler of the Kushanas was Kujula Kadphises.
He was succeeded by Vima Kadphises.
The greatest ruler of the Kushana dynasty was Kanishka, who became king after
Vima. Kushana conquered Kashmir and established his supremacy over the Indo-
Gangetic plains. He occupied Kashgar, Yarkhand and Khotan in Central Asia. Punjab
and Afghanistan were also parts of the empire. Kanishka was a devoted Buddhist.
Through his efforts Buddhism spread to China, Central Asia and other countries. He
was also a great patron of art and learning. Purushapura (Peshawar) was his capital.
Kanishka’s successors were Vashishka, Huvishka, Kanishka II and V asudeva.
Vasudeva was the last great ruler of the Kushanas. After his death the mighty Kushana
Empire quickly disintegrated. The fall of Kushana Empire marked the beginning of
political uncertainty in north India which continued for about a century.
1.8 THE GUPTA AGE (319AD-550 AD)
The rise of Gupta Power in the 4th century AD marked the beginning of a new era
in Indian history. Confusion and political disunity were replaced by integrity. Under
the leadership and patronage of the powerful Gupta monarchs, considerable progress
was made in different aspects of Indian life. There was also a high material prosperity,
as mentioned by Fa-hien, the Chinese traveler (4
th–5th century AD).
Maharaja Shri Gupta is said to be the founder of the Gupta dynasty. He was
succeeded by Ghatotkacha Gupta. But Chandragupta I (319-355 AD), who
assumed the title of Maharajadhiraja, was the first important Gupta Monarch. Another
important Gupta emperor was Samudragupta. The eulogy, composed by his court
poet Harisena, which is available as Allahabad Pillar Inscription, gives a vivid account
of Samudragupta’s military exploits. Besides being a great conqueror and ruler, he
was also a poet of high order, patron of art and learning and a musician. He also
performed ‘Ashwamedha yajna’ – a symbol of imperial authority.
Samudragupta was succeeded by Chandragupta II (380-415 AD) who assumed the
title of Vikramaditya after his victory over the Shaka rulers of western India. In order
to consolidate his power, Samudragupta made important matrimonial alliances. His
daughter Prabhavati was married to the Vakataka ruler Rudrasena II. The son and
successor of Chandragupta II was Kumaragupta I (415-455 AD), whose reign was
marked with peace and prosperity. He was succeeded by his son Skandagupta
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 38
(455-467 AD), who repulsed the Hun invasion several times. The successors of
Skandagupta (Purugupta, Budhagupta, Narasimhagupta) were not so powerful and
competent. This gradually led to the decline and fall of the Gupta Empire.
Monarchy was the prevailing system of government during the Gupta Age. The king
was assisted by a Council of Ministers and other officials in day to day administration.
The Guptas had a powerful army. The provinces were ruled by governors. The
Governors had under them a number of officers who administered the districts and
towns. Village administration under the village headman (Gramika) enjoyed considerable
autonomy. The Guptas also developed an efficient system of judicial and revenue
administration.
1.8.1 Post Gupta Age (550AD-750 AD)
The period between the downfall of the Gupta Empire and the rise of Maharaja
Harshavardhana of Thaneshwar is considered to be a period of confusion and
disintegration. During this time India was broken into several small independent states.
Besides the Huna power, there were four other kingdoms in Northern India. These
were the later Guptas of Magadha, the Maukharis of Kanauj, the Pushyabhutis of
Thaneshwar and the Mitrakas of Vallabhi (Gujarat). Among the important South
Indian Dynasties were the Chalukyas of Badami and the Pallavas of Kanchi.
Pulakesin II (609-64 AD) and Narasimhavarman I (630-668 AD) are considered
to be the greatest of the Chalukya and the Pallava rulers respectively.
It was Harshavardhana who again made an attempt to raise an empire. He was called
Sakalottarapathanatha because he had established his hold practically over the whole
of North India. During this time, the political unity of India was, to some extent,
restored. Harsha patronised Banabhatta, the author of Kadambari and Harshacharita.
Hiuen Tsang, the Chinese scholar-traveler, visited India during Harsha’s reign.
Shashanka, the king of Bengal, was a contemporary of Harsha.
This period of history witnessed the consolidation of Hinduism. Hiuen Tsang writes
about the existence of caste system in Indian society. There was the rise of several
mixed and sub-castes. Hiuen Tsang also mentions the existence of untouchables and
outcastes. The position of women had also declined considerably during this period.
In the religious field, the ascendancy of Brahmanism brought about the decline of
Buddhism. Vaishnavism, Shaivism and Jainism were also practiced.
1.9 INDIAN CIVILISATION: AN OVERVIEW
Indian civilisation has a very important place in world history. As in Early Greece
and Rome, in India also some kind of democratic and republican form of government
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 39SOCIAL SCIENCE
existed in ancient times. We also made tremendous progress in philosophy and
various branches of science. Indian contribution to the fields of Mathematics,
Astronomy, Chemistry, Metallurgy and Medicine is worth mentioning. Aryabhatta and
Varahamihira were famous mathematicians-astronomers. Charaka and Sushruta were
great physicians. Nagarjuna was a famous chemist as well as pharmacist. The concept
of zero and the decimal system first evolved in India.
The ancient Indians also showed great skill in art, architecture, painting and sculpture.
Ashokan Pillars, Caves of Ajanta and Ellora, South Indian Temples, the famous Stupa
at Sanchi, Buddha’s images of Mathura are only a few examples from the vast ocean
of Indian art. Many great centres of learning were developed in Ancient India, like
Taxila, Nalanda, Vikramshila, Vallabhi, Kashi and Kanchi which imparted education
to both Indian and foreign students. Famous scholars and teachers taught in such
centre. Indian learning and scholarship was highly appreciated abroad by the Arab
Muslims.
Figure 1.5  Sanchi Stupa
Many great works of literature were produced in ancient India. Rig Veda is the earliest
specimen of Indo-European literature. The four V edas, Sutras, the two Epics-
Ramayana and Mahabharata, Smritis, Puranas, Tripitakas, Jaina Agamas and other
religious texts are the products of ancient India. Moreover, there are a number of
drama, prose and poetic works. Great literacy figures like Kalidasa, Banabhatta,
Harisena, Vishakhadatta, Bhasa, Bhairavi, Shudraka and many others belonged to
this period. Sanskrit, Pali and Prakrit literature made great progress in ancient India.
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 40
INTEXT QUESTION 1.3
1. What were the main occupations of people in the Later V edic Period?
2. Which religion did Ashoka embrace after the Kalinga war?
3. Name at least four great centers of learning in Ancient India.
4. Name two great physicians of Ancient India.
5. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The Tamil work Tolkappiyam belonged to the .....................
(b)  ..................... was the capital of the Pandyas.
(c) Kanishka belonged to the ..................... Dynasty.
WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
/circle6Human civilisation has evolved through various phases - each phase contributing
something unique.
/circle6The Stone Ages was followed by the Metal Ages – Copper, Bronze and Iron.
/circle6Town based civilisations came in the Bronze Age.
/circle6The art of writing was developed during the Bronze Age Civilisations.
/circle6The Indus Valley Civilisation was known for its town planning, crafts and culture.
/circle6The Iron Age brought radical changes in the social and economic life of the people
in different countries at different times.
/circle6Significant contributions were made in various fields such as polity, philosophy,
art, architecture and sculpture by the Greeks, Romans, Persians and Indians.
/circle6Buddhism and Jainism were the first reformatory movements in 6th century BC
India.
/circle6Indian Civilisation in its long course went through a number of significant
developments. It did not remain one and the same throughout.
/circle6India has made tremendous contributions in the fields of Mathematics, Astronomy,
Chemistry, Metallurgy, Medicines, Art, Architecture, Literature and Learning.
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Ancient World
Notes
 41SOCIAL SCIENCE
TERMINAL EXERCISES
1. How did the Bronze Age mark a shift from the New Stone Age?
2. What were the important features of the Harappa Civilisation?
3. Discuss how did the discovery of iron bring in radical changes in the lives of the
people?
4. Describe the Roman society and economy during 5
th century BC
5. Describe the social, religious and economic life of the Early Vedic people.
6. What is ‘dhamma’ according to Ashoka?
7. Write a short note on India’s contribution to World Civilisation.
8. On the given outline map of the world mark the following:
(i) Rivers - Tigris, Euphrates, Nile, Hwang Ho, Indus.
(ii) Places - Egypt, Greece, Rome, Iran, Nalanda.
ANSWER TO INTEXT QUESTIONS
1.1
1. (a) classes
(b) Natural calamities
(c) Mesopotamia
MODULE - 1 Ancient World
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
SOCIAL SCIENCE 42
2. Copper
3. Tigris and Euphrates
4. Hieroglyphics
5. Lothal (Gujarat), Kalibangan (Rajasthan), Banawali (Haryana), Dholavira (Gujarat),
Ropar (Punjab)
1.2
1. Agriculture, Transport and Warfare
2. Athens and Sparta
3. Tiber
4. (a) Byzantine Empire
(b) Cyrus
(c) forces of nature
1.3
1. Agriculture and Crafts
2. Buddhism
3. Taxila, Nalanda, Kashi, Vikramshila, Vallabhi
4. Charaka and Sushruta
5. (a) Sangam Age
(b) Madurai
(c) Kushana