MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 43SOCIAL SCIENCE
2
MEDIEV AL WORLD
We have just finished reading about the different civilisations of the ancient world.
Have you wondered what happened to these civilisations when the Ancient Period
came to an end? Did civilisations also come to an end? Or were the ancient
civilisations succeeded by equally significant ones during the Medieval Period? Let
us look for answers to such queries here. In this lesson we shall read about the
transformation of European society after the downfall of the Roman Empire. We shall
also see how the birth of a new religion called Islam led to the founding of a vast
empire that originated in West Asia and spread out over a large part of the world.
We shall also take a look at India’s medieval past to see what happened after the
decline of Harsha’s rule.
OBJECTIVES
After studying this lesson, you will be able to:
/circle6identify the Medieval Period as an important stage in the evolution of human
society;
/circle6describe the changes in political organization that took place after the collapse
of the Roman Empire;
/circle6explain the political, military and socio-economic aspects of Feudalism as it
existed in Western Europe;
/circle6describe the evolution of Islamic religion, society and polity in West Asia;
/circle6recognise the features of political organization during the Medieval Period in India
/circle6describe the main features of Medieval Indian economy; and
/circle6analyse how cultural and religious life during the Medieval Period in India
represented a unique tradition of synthesis.

MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 44
2.1 EUROPE IN MEDIEVAL TIMES
The Medieval Period is also called the Middle Ages. As the name suggests, it refers
to the period which succeeded the Ancient Period and came before the Modern
Period. But was it only a ‘Middle’ age caught in between two great ages with no
significance of its own? Not really since the Medieval Period constitutes an important
stage in the evolution of human society that needs to be studied for its own interest.
What is more, the achievements and glories of the Medieval Period were also
important steps towards the Modern Period.
You may find it interesting to know that the term ‘Middle Ages’ was coined by
Europeans in the 17
th century because they saw it as a long and dark period of
interruption between the Classical Period of Ancient Greek and Roman Civilisations
and their own Modern Age. However, the Medieval Period was not necessarily a
dark period or an interruption. For the Islamic world, it was a period when a
civilisation flowered and reached the height of its glory. In India, the Medieval Period
was an age of synthesis. It saw a fusion of old and new political, economic and social
systems. Out of this fusion emerged a unique cultural pattern of co-existence and
acceptance that became the hallmark of the Medieval Period of India. Even in
Europe, the picture does not appear as gloomy as it is sometimes thought. In the
early part of the Medieval Period the level of material and cultural accomplishment
was no doubt somewhat low. However, during the later part the Europeans greatly
improved their standard of living. They also developed new institutions of learning
and new modes of thought and reached very high standards in literature and art. In
fact, the new ideas that emerged during this time not only transformed Europe but
also had a deep impact on the rest of the world in the times to come. Let us then
find out what was happening in the different parts of the world during the medieval
ages.
2.1.1 Decline of the Roman Empire
We have read in the previous lesson about the strength and greatness of the Roman
Civilisation. We also read how the Roman Empire had come to be divided into
Western and Eastern territories. The Western provinces had their capital in Rome
while the Eastern provinces had their capital in Constantinople. The Roman Emperor
Constantine had set up the new capital of the Eastern territories in the ancient Greek
city of Byzantine in 330AD. It came to be known as Constantinople after his name.
The Roman Empire continued to exist in the east for almost a thousand years after
it had collapsed in the west. It was known as the Eastern Roman or the Byzantine
Empire. This Eastern Civilisation of Greek speaking people reached very high
standards of economic and cultural life at a time when Western Europe was in a
relatively backward condition. The Roman Empire in the west came to an end
following attacks by various Germanic tribes like the Goths, Vandals, Visigoths and
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 45SOCIAL SCIENCE
Franks. After overthrowing the Roman Emperor in the West in 476 AD, these
invaders established separate successor states.
Did all this political upheaval result in a complete change? Did the political and
economic systems built by the Romans disappear? Well, the new Germanic rulers
did not completely replace the earlier systems with their own. In fact, Roman and
Germanic societies came into close contact and merged with each other. As a result
of this and the prevailing political and economic conditions, a new type of society
was born in Europe, with institutions and systems that were quite different from either
Roman or Germanic ones. The most important institution of this new society was
Feudalism. It completely transformed the existing social, political and economic
organizations. Let us see how this system evolved and what its characteristics were.
2.2 FEUDALISM: POLITICAL, MILITARY AND SOCIO-
ECONOMIC ASPECTS
The successor states of the Germanic peoples in the West managed to restore political
stability after the collapse of the Roman Empire. In fact, one of these states managed
to create a sizeable empire under the famous king Charlemagne, which began to
collapse after about mid-9
th century under the impact of fresh waves of invasions.
The resulting political chaos led to the emergence of a new kind of political order
called Feudalism. It was a hierarchical or graded organization of political sovereignty.
This hierarchical structure can be understood easily if we visualize a ladder or a flight
of steps. At the top of the ladder stood the King, below him stood the big lords
known as the Dukes and Earls. Below these lords were a number of lesser lords
known as the Barons. Below these were the Knights, who were perhaps the lowest
category of lords. The lords derived their authority from and owned their loyalty to
the lord just above them and were known as the vassals of their lord. This pattern
of relationship between lords and vassals, that is, between bigger lords and lesser
lords was the same from the top of the ladder to the bottom. These lords were all
powerful in their respective local areas. Thus political power was widely dispersed
unlike in the Roman Empire where it was concentrated mainly in the hands of the
king. This was the political aspect of Feudalism.
A unique feature of the new feudal political structure was the personal nature of the
bond that linked a lord and his vassal. An elaborate ceremony would be organized
to establish this bond. In this ceremony, a vassal would take a vow to serve the lord
all his life. Simultaneously, he also accepted the protection of the lord. Protection
was important since these were politically unstable times. In return for the protection
that a vassal received he was bound to perform various services for his lord. This
mainly included military services which meant that the vassal had to provide a certain
number of troops whenever required by the lord. In his turn the lord was expected
to make a grant usually in the form of land for the sustenance of the ‘fief’ or ‘fiefdom’
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 46
from which the word Feudalism is derived. The lords used to mobilize armed
supporters in their own areas who had personal loyalty directly to him. With this
armed strength, he would provide military support to the lord whenever required.
With this military power, the lords also became complete masters of their own area
and could not be challenged even by the state.
In a period of political turmoil, just as the lords sought protection, so did the peasant.
These peasants had no land of their own, no implements and could not afford to
buy seeds. For these well as for protection the free peasants now turned to the lords.
These dependent peasants of Medieval Europe, tied to the soil and completely
subject to the authority of the lord were called serfs. A major portion of the wealth
generated during this period was through their exploitation. To understand how this
happened, let us see how agriculture was organised during this period.
The entire landed estate over which a feudal lord had control was known as the
manor. The land surrounding the manor house was divided into three parts - land
for the use of the lord, the arable land granted in parcels to the peasants and the
meadowlands used by everyone as grazing land for livestock. The serfs who occupied
these parcels or holdings were regarded tenants of the lord of the manor. Being
tenants, they had to give something to the lord as rent. This rent was paid by peasants
in the form of labour services to the lord. They also worked on the lands of the lords
for a certain number of days in the week. The serfs had to put in extra labour during
agricultural seasons when plugging, harvesting or threshing was required. Such unpaid
labor services also included other heavy tasks such as construction work, hewing
and cutting of fire wood. In the later phase of Feudalism, these labor services were
gradually substituted by those payable in money.
Figure 2.1  Feudal Manor
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 47SOCIAL SCIENCE
The serfs also had to pay some dues or taxes in kind which came from the share
of their own produce. These were often introduced arbitrarily whenever the lord
wanted more resources. The lords also extracted from the peasants in an indirect
manner. The manor was a self-sufficient economic unit. This means that almost all
articles of everyday use were produced and consumed on it. For this there were
various facilities like smithies for turning out iron object, flour mills for grinding wheat
or corn, ovens for baking bread, wine presses for making wine from grapes and
various workshops for making products of everyday use. All of these were owned
by the lord. The peasants were forced to use these facilities and the charges for these
would of course be fixed by the lord according to his own will.
ACTIVITY 2.1
You have already read about the Roman slaves in the previous lesson. Find out the
conditions of present day Indian farmers who don’t own lands and work in other
people fields through newspaper or by speaking to your elders. Now compare the
lives of the feudal serfs with the Roman slaves and the present day Indian farmers.
What conclusions can you draw? Write a brief report about your findings.
2.2.1 Changes in Feudal Economy: Prosperity and Crisis in Medieval Europe
We have just finished reading about the various aspects of the feudal system. But
did this system remain the same throughout the Medieval Period? Not at all! Indeed,
the feudal system was not a static system. It witnessed several changes and the feudal
economy underwent a pattern of prosperity and crisis. Let us trace this pattern from
the beginning.
The few centuries after the collapse of the Roman Empire were marked by a low
level of economic life. As we already know, this was also a period of political change
and turmoil. There was a decline in town life, trade and monetary exchange. Some
cities did survive from Roman days but these were only empty shells which had no
real economic role. Roads deteriorated. Barter widely replaced the use of money.
European economy was based almost entirely on agriculture and very limited local
trade. The main economic unit was the self-sufficient landed estate, or the feudal
manor that we have read about. Technology used in agriculture was backward and
agricultural yields were low. These conditions lasted till about the 10
th century AD.
After the 10th century, the feudal system of production underwent significant changes.
There was an increase in agricultural fields as the system became more and more
stable. Another factor that helped in increasing agricultural productivity at this time
was a significant improvement in agricultural techniques. A new plough was introduced
which was heavier, had wheels and was drawn by a team of oxen. This helped in
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 48
cultivating the heavy and sticky soil of Northern Europe more effectively. Agriculture
was later replaced by the Three Field System in which 1/3rd of the land was left
fallow; 1/3rd was used for cultivating autumn crop and 1/3rd for a spring crop. By
leaving only a third part of the land fallow, the Three Field System helped greatly
in increasing the cropped area. The new plough, Three Field System and other
innovations in agricultural techniques helped in increasing the agricultural yield by
several times.
Along with the expansion in agriculture the period from the 10
th to the 12th century
also witnessed the revival of trade and the growth of town life. Trade ranged from
the small trade at local markets where peasants sold their excess grain or eggs and
bought long distance trade products like wine or cotton. Improvements in road
building helped road transport. Rives and sea routes were also used for trade. The
revival in trade made necessary new patterns of payment since barter was inadequate
for this purpose. As a result, money economy made a tremendous advance. This
led to agricultural prosperity of the surrounding rural areas. The towns soon began
to specialize in certain enterprises. One of these was cloth making which became
one of the most important industries of these towns. Guilds became important. Both
merchant activities and craft production came to be organized around guilds. These
medieval towns continued to grow in importance and ultimately became an important
factor in the breakdown of feudal relations of the countryside.
The tendency towards growth reached its limits by the end of the 12
th century.
Significant changes could be noticed in the feudal system by the 13th century which
witnessed a reversal of the process of growth. The period of economic growth and
prosperity resulted in a rise of population. This meant an increase in the supply of
labour for the landlords. They, therefore, no longer found it necessary to retain their
demesnes. Also due to abundant labor, labor-serving technology found few investors.
As demesne lands were gone, the need to extract labor services from the peasants
also went. The reduction in labor services and technological stagnation in agriculture
together with other factors brought down agricultural yield very sharply. Food
shortage and famines began to occur. Epidemics of plague broke out. All this resulted
in an overall decline in the agricultural economy whereas there was growth of a money
economy, urban centers and trade. However, European society was able to
overcome this crisis more easily than the pre-10
th century crisis and by around 1450
the economy started moving towards recovery.
The portion of the entire landed estate of the lord which was managed directly
by him was called the DEMESNE.
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 49SOCIAL SCIENCE
We now have some idea about the conditions in which people in Medieval Europe
lived. We have also been able to trace the pattern of change in these conditions over
a period of several centuries. How did these changes in the material conditions affect
the society and culture of medieval Europe? Let us see for ourselves.
Given the relatively low level of economic life in the period before the 10
th century,
we should not be surprised to know that it was not a prosperous time for learning
or the arts. During this period learning remained a privilege of the few. The masses
received no formal education. In fact, the language of learning was Latin which was
known only to the priestly class. However, even this little bit of education was of
a very narrow kind. It consisted mostly of memorization, without any reasoning or
questioning. All learning was dominated by blind faith. In such conditions, naturally,
there was hardly any development in the sciences. There was some attempt at a
revival, but even this did not result in any real intellectual creativity. However, the
educated members of the priestly and monastic orders did try to recopy and preserve
some major works of Roman literature. This, at least, served as the basis of a revival
of learning that began in the 11
th and 12th centuries. This period saw very little
significant production in the area of literature because of the low level of literacy.
The same is the case with artistic productions in this period. However, a unique style
that developed in this field was that of manuscript illustrations. On the whole it may
be said that in this period cultural attainment was minimal and sparse. European
Civilisation at that time was much backward in comparison with other contemporary
neighboring civilisations like the Byzantine and the Islamic world.
The prosperity and relative peace of the period from the 10
th century brought about
a consequent change in the cultural life of the period. This period witnessed rise in
literacy with the spread of primary education and the opening of universities. There
was an attempt at the acquisition of classical knowledge as well as knowledge from
the Arab Civilisation. Thus, this period saw a progress in knowledge and thought
in Europe. It was an important step towards the intellectual flowering that took place
during the Modern Period.
INTEXT QUESTIONS 2.1
1. Describe the bond between the feudal lord and his vassal in about 30 words.
2. Who were the serfs?
3. Justify the following statements giving reasons for the same:
(a) The period from the 10
th to the 12th century witnessed a revival of trade
and growth of town life.
............................................................................................................
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 50
(b) From the 13 th century onwards there was a reversal in the trend of growth
of feudal economy.
............................................................................................................
(c) The cultural life before the 10th century was a prosperous time for learning
and the arts in Europe.
............................................................................................................
2.3 ARAB CIVILISATION DURING THE MEDIEV AL
PERIOD
Arabia is a peninsula of deserts. Before the founding of Islam, most Arabs were
Bedouins, that is, wandering camel herdsmen. Their main source of livelihood was
pastoralism and the produce of the desert oases such as dates. Craft production was
very limited; trade was sluggish and urban development minimal. In the second half
of the 6
th century, the economy picked up some momentum due to a shift in long
distance trade routes. There was an ongoing war between the two dominant
neighboring empires of Arabia, namely the Roman and the Persian. Because of these
wars, Arabia became a safer transit route than others for caravans going between
Africa and Asia. This encouraged the growth of some important towns that took
advantage of this trade. The most prominent of these was Mecca which lay on the
junction of some major trade routes. Mecca’s position also derived from its local
religious importance since the Kabah, a pilgrimage shrine was located here. The
Kabah at that time served as a centre of worship for diverse Arabian clans and tribes.
This shrine was controlled by the Quraysh tribe which played a powerful role in the
economic life of Mecca. A brilliant civilisation arose in Arabia in the Medieval Period
which influenced a large section of the world population. It owed its emergence to
the birth of Islam, which was a significant development in world history.
Prophet Muhammad who spread Islam was born in Mecca into the Quraysh tribe
in 570 AD. He was brought up by his uncle since he was orphaned early in life.
He grew up to be a prosperous trader, entering the service of a rich widow Khadija,
whom he later married. Polytheism or belief in many Gods was replaced by a strict
monotheism or belief in one God which became the basis for this new religion known
as Islam and Muhammad was hailed as a ‘Prophet’. At first, he was not very
successful in gaining many converts amongst the Quraysh, except for a limited few
including his wife Khadija. Meanwhile, representatives of another town in the north
called Yathrib invited Prophet Muhammad to come and resolve their local rivalries.
In 622 AD, Muhammad with his followers migrated to that town. That year of
migration was called Hijrah and the town was renamed as Medina. He continuously
began to organize his converts into a political as well as religious community. In an
attempt to spread his faith to Mecca, he and his followers conducted raids on
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 51SOCIAL SCIENCE
caravans of the Quraysh. He finally succeeded in 630 AD and entered Mecca after
defeating the Quraysh. The Quraysh submitted to the new faith and the Kabah
henceforth became the main shrine of Islam. After the defeat of Mecca, other tribes
throughout Arabia accepted the new faith.
Islam has simple doctrines. The word ‘Islam’ means absolute submission to God and
adherence to faith. The followers of this faith are knows as Muslims. Islam teaches
that there is only one God. Prophet Muhammad is believed by Muslims to be the
last and greatest prophet of God. They also recognize the prophets of the Jews and
Christians. Muslims believe in the Day of Judgment when the pious would be granted
eternal life in paradise and the wicked would be damned. Quran is the holy book
of the Muslims which is a compilation of the revelations that Prophet Muhammad
was believed to have received from God. These steps include dedication to a life
of morality and compassion, adherence to some set religious observances like prayer
and fast at stipulated times, charity, pilgrimage to Mecca and frequent recitation from
the Quran. Apart from the Quran, the Sunna or Practices of the Prophet and Hadis
or Sayings of the Prophet also set the norms for desirable behavior among Muslims.
In Islam, there are no intermediaries between the individual and God. Instead of
priests there are only religious scholars who have the authority to comment on the
religion and religious laws. Islam also preaches equality of all. Islam has many
similarities in doctrine and beliefs with Judaism and Christianity.
2.3.1 Society and Culture
Arab Philosophy was based on the study of earlier Greek thought. Greek Philosophy
was cultivated by philosophers who believed in rationality. These philosophers apart
from their philosophical speculation were also distinguished in studying Natural
Sciences. They practiced Astrology and Medicine. Their astrology was based on
accurate astronomical observation. In medicine, they not only studied the medical
writings of the Greeks carefully but went much beyond that. Ibn Sina, known to the
West as Avicenna, discovered the infectious nature of tuberculosis and described
several types of nervous ailments. Al-Razi, known to the West as Rhazes, one of
the greatest clinical physicians of the Medieval World discovered the difference
between measles and smallpox. Other Arabic physicians also diagnosed cancer of
the stomach and prescribed antidotes for cases of poisoning. An interesting feature
about the Arab people is that they excelled over all other medieval cultures in the
organization of hospitals. There seems to have been at least 34 hospitals located in
important cities of Persia, Syria and Egypt organized on remarkably modern lines.
The Arabs also excelled in Optics, Chemistry and Mathematics. Physicists founded
the Science of Optics and drew a number of significant conclusions regarding the
velocity, transmission and refraction of light. In chemistry, these people are credited
with the discovery of various new substances and compounds like carbonate of soda,
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 52
alum, saltpeter, nitric and sulphuric acids among other things. There were also the
first to describe the chemical processes of distillation, filtration and sublimation. In
mathematics, the greatest accomplishment of Arabs was to bring together the
Geometry of the Greeks and the Number System of the Indians. In fact, the use
of the Indian Number System spread so widely through the Arabs that the west named
them ‘Arabic Numerals’. With a synthesis of all this existing knowledge, the Arabs
were able to make great progress in Arithmetic, Geometry and Trigonometry. These
Indian numerals are even now used all over the world. They have not now come
to be known as European numerals.
Figure 2.2 Number System
The Arab Civilisation was also noted for its Literature particularly poetry. The
Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam is an example of poetry that is remembered to this day.
Just as in other fields, Arab Art also represented a beautiful synthesis of various styles
like the Byzantine and the Persian. Architecture was the most important of the Arab
arts. Examples of Arab architecture include mosques, palaces and madrasas. Its
principal features were domes, minarets, arches etc.
In short it may be said that at a time when the West was lagging far behind, Arab
Civilisation was at its peak intellectually and artistically. The establishment of a vast
empire brought the Arabs into contact with diverse cultures such as Arab, Persian,
Turkish, Indian and African. With these diverse elements it created a splendid society
leaving behind a legacy of discoveries and achievements.
ACTIVITY 2.2
Recollect and make a list of at least 5 monuments you have visited or seen on books
or magazines which reflects Arab architecture, in India as well as outside India. What
were the distinct features of these monuments? Where were they located? What were
your thoughts on viewing them? Suggest ways to conserve them.
2.4 MEDIEVAL INDIAN CIVILISATION
In the previous lesson we have read about the Gupta Empire. After the reign of King
Harshavardhana, began a prolonged period of political decentralization between the
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 53SOCIAL SCIENCE
8th and 10th centuries during which several kingdoms struggled for supremacy. In
Northern India, the three major kingdoms were those of the Palas, the Pratiharas
and the Rashtrakutas. Smaller kingdoms or principalities were established by the
Rajput Dynasties of the Chauhans, Paramaras, Gahadavalas, etc.  In the South, it
was the Chola Dynasty that had control over most of the peninsular part of the
country. This situation of fragmentation of political authority was greatly favourable
for an invader like Mahmud of Ghazni. After several successful conquests in Western
and Central Asia, Mahmud turned toward India. His Indian conquests began in 1000
AD, after which he made repeated invasions over Punjab, as far as Kashmir and
Eastern Rajasthan and then into the fertile area of the Gangetic Plains. However,
Mahmud was not interested in establishing his rule over this country.
2.4.1 Political Events
Mahumud’s invasions were followed by the coming of the Turks. The Turks
established their rule over most of Northern India by the 13
th century.  The Turkish
rulers were known as Sultans and ruled from their capital at Delhi. Their Empire is
thus called the Delhi Sultanate. Its most powerful dynasties were those of the Khaljis
and the Tughluqs. Most of these rulers had to face the threat of invasions by the
Mongols. Meanwhile in the South, the two powerful kingdoms of Vijayanagar and
Bahmani were constantly competing with each other for political supremacy.  The
coming of the Mughals in early 16
th century marked a new era in Indian History.
Politically, it saw the consolidation of an all India Empire on a scale that had not
been witnessed in India for a long time. Socially and culturally, this was a period
of fusion of various traditions. Out of this fusion was born a unique tradition which
could be seen in the social life, religious practices and beliefs, and in the various arts.
It was based on mutual acceptance and a harmonious coexistence.
Parallel to these centralized empires such as the Delhi Sultanate and the Mughal
Empire, there flourished several smaller regional and provincial independent ruling
dynasties. Some of these were the Ilyas Shahi and Husain Shahi Dynasties of Bengal,
the Ahoms of Assam, the Gajapati Dynasty of Odisha, the Dynasties of Mewar and
Marwar in Rajasthan and the Sharqi Dynasty of Jaunpur. The reign of these
independent regional dynasties witnessed the growth of strong and flourishing regional
and sub-regional languages, literature and cultures.
2.4.2 Political Institutions
The coming of the Turks and the Mughals brought in new ideas of sovereignty and
governance.  In the first place, kingship itself had no clear-cut legitimate place in the
Islamic conception of   polity which was based on the notion of a community of equals.
Initially power was shared between the Sultan and the powerful Turkish chiefs or
nobles. But the reign of Balban saw an elevation of the position of the Sultan, so
much so that he assumed absolute power in all matters of state and governance. The
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 54
power of the Turkish nobility was considerably downsized. The Mughals established
the power and prestige of the king at an unprecedented level.
The Sultans of Delhi and the Mughal Emperors made some innovations in the
administrative system. The Mughal Emperor came to be regarded as the Emperor
of India. In the Delhi Sultanate, military commanders were assigned territorial units
known as iqtas. These territories were transferable. The assignees of these iqtas
were not given ownership of the land but only control over the revenues collected
from them.  This revenue was to be used by the iqtadar, that is, the assignee to
meet his own requirements as well as for the maintenance of his troops.  He would
then be expected to provide military support with these troops whenever called upon
by the emperor to do so.  However, the pre-existing structure of control over land
and the hierarchy in the landed system of the village continued largely undisturbed.
The Mughal system was more penetrative with control over the revenue and landed
network going much deeper right to the village level. The Mughals appointed
mansabdars who performed military and civil duties. The mansabs were actually
ranks of position which was fixed according to the position of the officers in Mughal
bureaucracy and the military contingents under their command. These mansabdars
were mostly paid through land assignments called jagirs which were frequently
transferable. These were similar to iqtas, with the difference that while iqtas
combined administrative charge, jagirs did not. The Mughal system was crucially
dependent on the smooth functioning of Mansabdari and Jagirdari Systems.
2.4.3 Economy
The Delhi Sultanate as well as the Mughal Empire was based on the surplus of
agricultural produce of the peasants that was extracted in the form of revenue. In
the Mughal Empire, particularly in the reign of Akbar, far reaching changes were made
in the system of revenue collection. Land was measured and land revenue was fixed
according to the exact area of land.  Fertility of the land was also taken into account.
The cash value of the state’s share of the produce was then calculated according
to prevailing market prices and the revenue was fixed in cash terms accordingly. The
state encouraged payment of revenue in cash. This was a period of commercialization
of agriculture and the state encouraged cash crop production. The state also took
a lot of interest in the extension of cultivation into zones which were hitherto
uncultivated or forest areas. It gave various incentives to pioneer agriculturists. The
state also advanced to peasants loans as well as revenue relief in times of crop failure.
Trade and commerce which had declined greatly following the period of the Guptas
saw a revival during this time. Urban centers flourished after a considerable period
of decline. Inland trade increased in the 13
th and 14th centuries as a result of this
new urbanization. A vast network of road connecting these urban centers came up
which also facilitated trade. Cities like Delhi, Agra, Lahore, Multan, Dhaka,
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 55SOCIAL SCIENCE
Ahmadabad, Surat and Bombay rose in importance. The merchandise from Punjab
was sent to markets in West and Central Asia. Political stability and relative peace
established by the Mughals made it possible to travel with considerable ease among
the cities of the empire. Coastal trade also flourished. There were a large number
of trading classes and commercial practices were of high standard and integrity. The
seths, bohras and modis were engaged in long-distance trade, while beoparis and
baniks dealt in local and retail trade, the sarafs or shroffs were money changers
who issued hundis or Bills of Exchange.  The hundi was a letter of credit that could
be paid at a later date at the designated place. This facilitated the movement of goods
from one part of the country to another as it made the transaction of money over
long distance remarkably easy.
2.4.4 Cultural and Religious Life
In the sphere of religion and culture, the Medieval Period witnessed a great synthesis
of traditions. The Bhakti Movement and Sufism in the religious sphere are examples
of this. The Bhakti Movement which stressed on oneness with god through personal
devotion came very close to the everyday lives of ordinary people. It stressed on
love, purity and devotion rather than rituals and sacrifices. It questioned the caste
system and the authority of Brahmans. Bhakti saints, like Ramananda, Kabir,
Ravidas, Mira Bai, Guru Nanak, Tukaram and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had a deep
impact on the minds of the common people and this influence continues even today.
In fact, some of these saints developed large following. For example, Guru Nanak
had deep influence over the people of Punjab. His large following led him to found
a new religion called Sikhism whose followers are called Sikhs.
Figure 2.3  Guru Nanakji
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 56
Kabir ke Dohe:
Dukh mein simran sab kare, Sukh mein kare na koye
Jo sukh mein simran kare, Tau dukh kahe ko hoye
(Translation)
In anguish everyone prays to Him, in joy does none
To One who prays in happiness, how sorrow can come
In a similar manner, the Sufi saints also stressed on devotion and love as the only
way to realize the divine. They preached tolerance and compassion. They lived lives
of austerity and shared the sorrows and anxieties of the common masses. As a result
their influence over the masses, both Hindus and Muslims, was very strong. There
was also a lot of interaction between the Sufi and Bhakti saints and exchange of
philosophical idea took place.  Both traditions in fact acted as a bridge between the
two communities.
ACTIVITY 2.3
Try to find out if any Bhakti and Sufi saints lived in your state or your neighborhood.
Try to find more about them. Visit their shrine, if any. What did you see? Write your
experience in about 80-100 words.
Collect pictures of at least 3 Bhakti and Sufi saints each. Find out about them and
their teachings. Do you find similarities and differences in their teachings? Reflect and
write a few lines about each of them. What did you learn? Do you find their teachings
relevant? Share your thoughts with family and friends.
Language, literature, art, architecture, music and dance also bore out this trend of
synthesis between different traditions. In the area of language and literature, classical
languages like Persian and Sanskrit flourished. But, the real remarkable development
was in the growth of regional languages.
Under the Mughals, painting was organized in the royal karkhanas and painters were
on government payroll. The Mughal School of painting represented a complete
assimilation of the Persian and Indian styles. This to some extent was a result of the
fact that the artists of this school brought with them elements of the various traditions
to which they belonged like Rajputana, Gujarat, Malwa, etc. Some famous painters
were Daswant, Basavan, Mukund and Kesav. The supervision of the Persian masters
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 57SOCIAL SCIENCE
like Abdul Samad and Sayyid Ali brought in an element of Persian style as well.
Manuscript Illustration was another hallmark of Mughal painting.
Another fascinating aspect of cultural life in Medieval India is visible in its Indo-Islamic
architecture. It is characterized by the adaptation of Indian resources, expertise,
motifs and designs to Persian styles. New features like the arch and the dome were
combined with the use of Hindu motifs like bell, lotus, swastika and kalash/water
pot.  The Qutub Minar, the Allai Darwaza and various monuments of the Tulghlaq
Period like the Tomb of Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq are fine examples of architecture during
the Delhi Sultanate period. The monuments of the Mughal Period reflect a deeper
sense of fusion and assimilation of Indo-Islamic styles. For example, the monuments
in Fatehpur Sikri, like Panch Mahal, Birbal’s Palace and Ibadat Khana, as well as
the Tomb of Humayun in Delhi, Akabar’s famous Tomb at Sikandra, Itmadudaulah’s
Tomb in Agra and, of course, the Taj Mahal are outstanding examples of Mughal
architecture.
Figure 2.4  Qutub Minar
Music was also patronized by most medieval rulers in India. Indian system of vocal
and instrumental musical interfaced with Arab, Iranian and Central Asian traditions
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 58
of music. New ragas came to be composed. The Bhakti and Sufi traditions also
gave an impetus to new devotional styles of music.
The Medieval Period of Indian history, quite distinct in its characteristics of political
economic and cultural life, was thus another important outstanding period after the
Ancient Period.
INTEXT QUESTIONS 2.2
1. Give reasons why Mecca arose into prominence.
2. Enlist at least 5 fields in which we can see the contribution of Arab Civilisation.
3. Fill in the blanks:
(a) In the South, it was the .................... Dynasty that held way over most
of the Peninsular India.
(b) The Mughal System was based on the smooth functioning of the
.................... and .................... Systems.
(c) The .................... were money changers who issued hundis or Bills of
Exchange.
(d) The Bhakti Movement stressed on oneness with God though ....................
WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
/circle6The Medieval Period cannot be called a Dark Period since so many important
developments and growth in various spheres of life took place in different parts
of the world.
/circle6The most important institution of the society of Europe in the Medieval Period
was Feudalism.
/circle6The feudal system comprised a hierarchical of graded organization of political
authority.
/circle6An economic aspect Feudalism was characterized by serfdom and the manorial
system of production.
/circle6The feudal system was not a static one.  It underwent patterns of prosperity and
crisis.
/circle6The period before the 10th century of Europe was marked by low level of cultural
achievements. Cultural life improved, learning and intellectual development began
to flourish after the 10
th century.
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
 59SOCIAL SCIENCE
/circle6Islam was a new faith spread by Prophet Muhammad around the 7th century.
It has simple doctrines.
/circle6Islam spread to large  parts of the world
/circle6Up to about 1500 AD, Islamic culture and society was remarkably cosmopolitan
and dynamic. It witnessed great strides in cultural and scientific development.
/circle6The coming of the Turks and the Mughals brought new ideas of sovereignty and
governance to India. The iqta, jagirdari and mansabdari  systems were
important administrative innovations.
/circle6The Medieval Period in India was a period of economic growth.
/circle6The cultural and social life in Medieval India was marked by a unique synthesis
of different traditions.
TERMINAL EXERCISES
1. Explain why the Medieval Period is a significant period that needs to be studied
to understand the evolution of human society?
2. Describe the changes that took place in the political and economic life in Western
Europe after the downfall of the Roman Empire.
3. Examine the main features of Medieval Indian economy.
4. What are the main teachings of Islam? Discuss in about 100 words.
5. ‘Arab Civilisation in the Medieval Period left behind a legacy of sicoveries and
achievements’. Justify this statement.
6. Differentiate between Iqtadars and Mansabs.
7. What were the important teachings of the Bhakti Movement and Sufism? How
did acted as a bridge between the Hindus and the Muslims?
8. Illustrate how Medieval Indian culture represented a harmonious synthesis of
traditions in the fields of arts, architecture and music.
ANSWER TO INTEXT QUESTIONS
2.1
1. The lord and his vassal shared a personal bond which was established through
an elaborate ceremony. The vassal would take a vow to serve the lord while
the lord protects the vassal in return.
MODULE - 1
India and the World
through the Ages
Notes
Medieval World
SOCIAL SCIENCE 60
2. Serfs were dependent peasants of Medieval Europe, tied to the soil and
completely under the authority of the lord.
3. (a) Yes. Due to the increase in agricultural yield, people could now sell the
excess produce and buy products of long distance trade.
(b) Yes. The reduction in labor services and technological stagnation led to
lesser agricultural produce.
(c) No. Education was a privilege of the few with the masses given no education,
and learning was dominated by blind faith.
2.2
1. Mecca rose into prominence because it lay on the junction of some major trade
routes and it was a place of an important religious shrine, first with the diverse
Arabian clans and tribes, and later with the spread of Islam.
2. Astrology, Medicine, Natural Sciences, Literature, Mathematics, Architecture.
3. (a) Chola
(b) Mansabdari, Jagirdari
(c) sarafs or shroffs
(d) personal devotion